.TH LIGHTC 1 "2025-05-15" "Lumen 1.0.0" "Lumen Manual"
.SH NAME
lightc \- Lua compiler

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lightc
[\fIoptions\fR] [\fIfilenames\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B lightc
is the Lua bytecode compiler. It translates Lua source files into binary precompiled files (bytecode) that can later be loaded and executed by the Lua interpreter.

Precompiling chunks provides:

.IP \[bu] 2
Faster loading time  
.IP \[bu]
Protection of source code from modification  
.IP \[bu]
Off-line syntax checking  

Note that precompiling does not improve runtime performance: Lua always compiles source into bytecode before execution. The main benefit is reducing startup time.

Precompiled chunks are architecture-dependent: they are portable only between systems with the same word size and byte order.

By default, all input files are compiled into a single output file:
.B lightc.out
You can specify a different output with the
.B \-o
option.

You can mix Lua source files and binary files on the command line. This allows bundling multiple chunks into a single file.

.SH OPTIONS
Options must be passed separately (e.g. "\-p \-l", not "\-pl").

.TP
.B \-l
List the compiled bytecode (disassembly) for Lua's virtual machine. This is helpful for learning or debugging.  
If no files are provided,
.B lightc
loads
.B lightc.out
and lists its contents.

.TP
.BI \-o " file"
Set output filename to
.IR file .
Default is
.B lightc.out .
Use
.B \-
to output to stdout (not recommended on platforms where stdout is opened in text mode).

.TP
.B \-p
Parse input files and load them, but do not produce output. Used for syntax checking or integrity testing.  
If no files are given,
.B lightc
will load
.B lightc.out
and validate it. No output is printed if the file is valid.

.TP
.B \-s
Strip debug information (line numbers, local variable names, etc.) before writing output. This reduces file size, but makes debugging harder.

.TP
.B \-v
Show version information.

.SH FILES
.TP
.B lightc.out
Default output file for compiled bytecode.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR light (1)
.br
https://github.com/jakitliang/lumen

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Error messages are self-explanatory. Syntax errors or invalid bytecode will cause informative failures.

.SH AUTHORS
Jakit Liang

.SH COPYRIGHT
Lumen is released under the BSD-2 Clause License.
