.TH LIGHT 1 "2025-05-15" "Lumen 1.0.0" "Lumen Manual"
.SH NAME
light \- Lua interpreter

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B light
[\fIoptions\fR] [\fIscript\fR [\fIargs\fR]]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B light
is the stand-alone Lua interpreter under the name "light". It loads and executes Lua programs, either in textual source form or in precompiled binary form (compiled with
.BR lightc (1)).

The given
.I options
are handled first. Then the Lua program in the file
.I script
is loaded and executed. Additional
.I args
are available to the script as strings in the global table
.BR arg .

If no
.I script
is provided, the interpreter enters interactive mode.

.SH ARGUMENTS
The
.B arg
table is populated as follows:

.TP
\fBarg[0]\fR
The script name.

.TP
\fBarg[1] ... arg[n]\fR
Arguments passed after the script name.

.TP
\fBarg[-1], arg[-2], ...\fR
Arguments passed before the script (e.g. options), including the interpreter name.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-
Read and execute from standard input (stdin), even if stdin is a terminal.

.TP
.BI \-e " stat"
Execute the Lua statement
.I stat
before processing the script. Useful for one-liners.

.TP
.B \-i
Enter interactive mode after executing the script or statements.

.TP
.BI \-l " name"
Load the library
.I name
using
.B require
before executing the script.

.TP
.B \-v
Show interpreter version information.

.TP
.B \--
Stop handling options. All following arguments are passed to the script.

.SH INTERACTIVE MODE
If no arguments are provided and stdin is a terminal,
.B light
enters interactive mode. It prompts for input using the values of the global variables
.B _PROMPT
and
.B _PROMPT2
(if they exist and are strings). The default prompts are
.B "> "
and
.B ">> "
respectively.

If a line starts with
.B =
the rest of the line is treated as an expression and its results are printed.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B LUA_INIT
If defined, this string is executed before anything else. If the value starts with '@', the rest is treated as a filename and executed as a Lua script.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR lumenc (1)
.br
https://github.com/jakitliang/lumen

.SH AUTHORS
Jakit Liang

.SH COPYRIGHT
Lumen is released under the BSD-2 Clause License.
